Please provide an abstract of 250 or fewer words that describes the project you
wish to undertake at the RCAC. If a fellowship is awarded, this abstract may be
used on the RCAC’s website and in other publicity materials.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Visualize Diachronic Human-environment Interactions: A Model for the Milesian Peninsula

This project aims to characterize the nature and intensity of the
human-environment interactions (exchange network, settlement patterns,
hinterland occupation and flows of commodities) on the Milesian Peninsula
(southwestern Turkey, province of Aydın) from the prehistoric to the ottoman
era (ca. 5th millennium B.C./2nd millennium A.D.). The results of the
intensive survey of the *Panormos Project* started in 2015 undoubtedly showed
that the interspace between the well known settlements (Milet, Didyma, Tavşan
Adası), remains mostly undocumented. This project is divided into two
interdependent parts.

First, by analyzing freshly collected data from a micro-region, I target to
build visualization (point patterns, surface modeling)  that do better justice
to the remains, in order to understand the underlying processes (physical and
cultural). How dramatic changes in the Milesian Peninsula  and complex cultural
variations (rise of complexity, invasions, migrations, etc.) shifted the
patterns of human-environment interactions?

Second, uncertainty and inaccuracy in time and space (intrinsic to the nature of
data) as well as in the collection of data ('human error') has been
underestimated in archaeological applications. To address this problem, I will
adapt statistical methods (Monte Carlo and aoristic analysis) to archaeological
records. This part of the project aims to expand the capacity of formulating
human-environment generalizations and will have a broader impact on the field of
archeology.

Furthermore, an important goal of this project is to strength the ongoing
relations and facilitate comparisons between surveys by enabling the creation of
similar basis. The computational implementation of this project will use the
open source programming language R and thus make my research more  transparent,
reusable, adaptable and modifiable by other (anatolian) survey projects.  

